---
title: "Harold Bloom's The American Religion"
date: 2021-12-20T10:23:48-04:00
draft: false
---

Harold Bloom is always an entertaining writer, in a curmudgeonly, opinionated way. Specifically, I think he's immensely talented at "appreciative" writing, criticism that tries to express something of the gestalt or aesthetic power of the work being criticized. He writes wonderfully about Shakespeare and Dickinson for example. It's something akin to what Sontag talks about in her essay Against Interpretation. It's also a reason why I like Ebert's film reviews; the love of movies just shines through. 

Anyway, that was why I picked up this book of his from the shelf of the apartment where I'm staying. And I'm only a couple chapters in but finding it very enjoyable. I knew that Bloom had this controversial interpretation of the documentary hypothesis for the composition of the Bible, that he elaborated in *The Book of J*. So I was curious what else he had to say about religion. 

It turns out that his main argument is that, regardless of what people *say* they believe, U.S. Americans are mostly adherents of what he calls "The American Religion", which comes out of Christianity but actually has more in common with Gnosticism, which is generally considered a heresy. Gnosticism, Enthusiasm, and Orphism are for Bloom the tendencies that make American Religion what it is. Harold Bloom considers himself a Jew with Gnostic sympathies himself, and describes himself as having an affinity for these tendencies himself (American that he is). The reference to Gnosticism makes me think of Lurianic Kabbalah, a late-medieval semi-Gnostic tendencies in Judaism which is described early on in Karen Armstrong's *The Battle for God*. Armstrong elaborates the Lurianic idea of a fallen Creation which shattered divinity and scattered its shards across the world, to then trace a kind of genealogy to present-day fundamentalism. Bloom does something similar, in critiquing contemporary U.S. fundamentalism as actual closer to earlier heresies than anything like European Christianity.

I think Bloom's comments are suggestive for thinking about Buddhist converts in the U.S. In *American Dharma*, Ann Gleig describes contemporary Buddhism in the U.S. as increasingly post-modernist &mdash; syncretic, self-reflexive, technologically-extended &mdash; as opposed to merely modernist. A lot of what she describes seems very close to what Bloom is saying concerning American Religion. There is the emphasis on a sacredness that exists in everyone and can only be accessed inside oneself, and a move away from a celibate clergy. There is a conception of religion as a *gnosis* or knowing, with spirituality treated as a kind of information. And there is the emphasis on personal experience, an obsessive concern with a particular phenomenology as marker of authenticity (which Bloom sees in the Second Great Revival and the religious criticism of William James). How unique these features are to the U.S. is another question, and one for which I am more skeptical of Bloom's thesis.
