---
title: "New Year"
date: 2022-01-05T13:10:58-05:00
draft: false
---

This is my first writing for the new year! I have a lot on my mind. One thing I'm thinking about lately is homeownership, and what that means for me. And I've been reflecting on the relative ethics of buying a house with money (if you have it), versus putting it in index funds. It seems on one level that index funds are clearly less ethical, since you're investing in companies doing war, driving climate change, and the like. But I have suspicions about homeownership too, not just from the perspective of living on stolen land, but in terms of what it might do to my political sensibility. Marx's insight was about how your material conditions, specifically how you are positioned into a system of making and consuming, structures how you think. If for Wittgenstein "The limits of your language are the limits of your world," then for Marx, the limits of your world are the limits of your economic horizon. But these are relatively superficial concerns, as it seems there's always a way to give back, to make an economic activity distributive and not just acquisitive. The bigger concerns have to do about where I want to be long-term, with the uncertainty of a global pandemic. 

On the culture side, I've been watching more movies. I installed an even stronger distraction blocker on my phone, and my stimulus-addiction has rerouted itself away from social media and TV and into film, which all-in-all is preferable for me, and certainly feels more satisfying or wholesome in a way that's hard to pin down, maybe because of the greater demand on my attention that movies make. With my mom, I watched *A Taxing Woman*, a film from Jizo Itami, the director of Tampopo. My mom had seen it in theaters in Japan when it came out in the eighties, so it was fun revisiting it with her. It's just as sex-obsessed and tonally goofy as Tampopo, but not as funny. However, it is much more a time capsule of Japan in the full throws of eighties aesthetics, which are a lot of fun, and has a great saxophone-prominent theme. In the past week or so, I've seen *Sansho the Bailiff*, the Mizoguchi film that's achingly sad, in a way that snuck up on me as the film went on. I think it's less visually striking than *Ugetsu*, the only other Mizoguchi I've seen, but maybe because *Sansho* is a more unified story, and more grounded in realism, it was more emotionally powerful. The next one I saw was *The Earrings of Madame du...* from Max Ophüls, my first from him. I thought it was very funny and clever, though not a film that has a very high opinion of the titular Madame or women in general. I didn't think the ending was tragic, as other folks who reviewed the film seemed to, so much as wryly cynical. And finally, I saw *The Third Man*, which I also really liked, though I wonder whether the movie wouldn't have been better with more Welles; his Moriarty-ish sociopathy is so wonderful. 

And now that I'm back in Willimantic, I want to be reading more! I have plenty of books to choose from, but also want to continue with the e-books I had downloaded before my e-reader became water-logged. More on that soon!